Welcome to Strollcast! I'm Eric.
And I'm Maya. We're your AI hosts, here to make research accessible while you're on the move.
Today we're diving into Punica, a system for serving multiple LoRA models efficiently. It's from Lequn Chen, Zihao Ye, and colleagues at the University of Washington and Duke.
This paper tackles a problem that's becoming increasingly common: you have one base LLM, but many different fine-tuned versions for different users or tasks.
Think of a platform where each customer has their own specialized LoRA adapter. Maybe one for legal documents, one for medical notes, one for code review.
The naive approach is to load each LoRA model separately. But that's wasteful because they all share the same base model weights.
Punica's insight is that you can batch requests across different LoRA models and process them together. The result is 12x higher throughput compared to existing serving systems.
Let's break down how they achieved this.
First, let's understand the problem. LoRA, or Low-Rank Adaptation, adds small trainable matrices to a frozen base model.
Each LoRA adapter might only be a few megabytes. But the base model could be tens of gigabytes.
If you serve LoRA models the traditional way, you load the base model plus one adapter, process requests, then swap to another adapter for different requests.
That's inefficient for two reasons. First, you're not batching across users with different adapters. Second, swapping adapters has overhead.
The ideal would be: load the base model once, keep multiple adapters in memory, and process requests for all of them simultaneously.
But here's the challenge. During inference, LoRA adds a computation: the input gets multiplied by adapter matrices A and B.
If different requests in your batch use different adapters, you can't just do one big matrix multiplication. Each request needs its own adapter weights.
This is where Punica's key innovation comes in: the SGMV kernel.
SGMV stands for Segmented Gather Matrix-Vector multiplication. It's a custom CUDA kernel designed specifically for this multi-LoRA scenario.
Let's unpack what that means. Normally, when you batch requests in an LLM, you combine all the inputs and do one big matrix multiplication.
With multiple LoRA adapters, you have a problem. Request 1 needs adapter A, request 2 needs adapter B, request 3 needs adapter A again, and so on.
SGMV handles this by segmenting the batch. It groups requests by their LoRA adapter, then processes each segment with the appropriate weights.
But here's the clever part: it does this within a single kernel launch. No separate kernel calls for each adapter.
The kernel gathers the right adapter weights for each segment, performs the matrix-vector multiplications in parallel, then scatters the results back.
This maintains high GPU utilization because you're still processing a large batch. You just route different parts of the batch through different adapters.
Let's get a bit more technical on the SGMV implementation.
The kernel has two variants: expand and shrink. In LoRA, you have two matrices per adapter. Matrix A expands the hidden dimension to the low-rank dimension, and matrix B shrinks it back.
For the expand kernel, they parallelize across the output feature dimension. Each CUDA block handles a specific LoRA adapter.
The shrink kernel is trickier because the output dimension is small, often just 8 or 16. Not enough parallelism there.
So they use a split-K strategy. They divide the input dimension across multiple blocks and do a reduction at the end.
Both kernels leverage GPU tensor cores for the actual matrix multiplication. That's critical for performance.
The result is that batching different LoRA models has nearly the same throughput as batching identical models.
In their experiments, they saw negligible performance difference between the "identical" case where all requests use the same adapter and the "distinct" case where every request uses a different adapter.
That's remarkable. It means you get efficient multi-tenant serving essentially for free.
SGMV is the core kernel, but Punica is a complete serving system. Let's talk about the architecture.
There are three main components: the scheduler, the SGMV execution layer, and memory management.
The scheduler receives incoming requests, each tagged with which LoRA adapter it needs. It groups requests into batches for processing.
The key scheduling decision is how to compose batches. You want to maximize GPU utilization while keeping latency reasonable.
Punica batches requests across different LoRA models within a single iteration. This is what enables the high throughput.
For memory management, Punica caches adapter weights on the GPU. Popular adapters stay resident.
Less popular adapters can be loaded on demand. The loading latency is only milliseconds because adapters are small.
This gives Punica flexibility. You're not constrained by which adapters are currently loaded on a GPU.
The system can consolidate requests to a small set of GPUs, loading adapters as needed, rather than pinning specific adapters to specific GPUs.
Let's talk numbers. How much does Punica actually improve over existing systems?
They compared against vLLM, which was the state-of-the-art LLM serving system at the time.
In the multi-LoRA scenario, Punica achieved 12x higher throughput while adding only 2 milliseconds of latency per token.
That 2 milliseconds is the overhead from the SGMV kernel compared to standard matrix multiplication. It's negligible for most applications.
They tested various workload distributions. "Distinct" where every request uses a different adapter. "Identical" where all requests use the same one.
Also "Uniform" where adapters are equally popular, and "Skewed" where popularity follows a Zipf distribution, meaning a few adapters get most of the traffic.
Across all distributions, Punica maintained high throughput. The skewed case was actually easiest because popular adapters stay hot in cache.
They also tested with different numbers of concurrent LoRA models. Punica scaled well up to hundreds of different adapters.
Memory efficiency was another win. By sharing the base model and only storing small adapters, GPU memory goes much further.
Let's zoom out and discuss the implications. Why is multi-tenant LoRA serving important?
The rise of LoRA has changed how organizations customize LLMs. Instead of fine-tuning the whole model, you train small adapters.
A single base model can have hundreds or thousands of LoRA adapters for different tasks, domains, or customers.
Think of it like a platform. The platform provider hosts the base LLM. Each customer uploads their specialized adapter.
Without Punica, serving this efficiently was hard. You'd either dedicate GPUs per customer, which is wasteful, or swap adapters constantly, which is slow.
Punica enables true multi-tenancy. One GPU cluster serves all customers efficiently, dynamically loading adapters as needed.
This reduces the cost per customer dramatically. It makes personalized LLMs economically viable.
And it's not just about cost. Lower latency means better user experience. Higher throughput means serving more users.
Punica fits into a broader ecosystem of LLM serving optimizations. Let's connect it to related work.
vLLM introduced PagedAttention for efficient KV cache management. Punica is complementary; it optimizes the LoRA computation, not the attention.
You could combine Punica's SGMV with vLLM's memory management. In fact, vLLM has since incorporated similar multi-LoRA support.
There's also work on LoRA weight compression. If adapters are smaller, you can cache more of them.
And techniques like LoRA merging, where you combine multiple adapters into one, can reduce the number of distinct adapters at the cost of some specificity.
Punica's approach is orthogonal to these. It doesn't require changing the adapters themselves, just how you batch the computation.
The SGMV kernel is open source. Other serving systems have adopted similar techniques since the paper came out.
For listeners thinking about deploying this, let's cover some practical points.
First, Punica is most beneficial when you have many different LoRA adapters. If you only have one or two, the overhead isn't worth it.
The crossover point depends on your workload, but roughly: if you're frequently switching between more than a handful of adapters, Punica helps.
Adapter size matters for memory planning. Typical LoRA adapters for a 7B model might be 10 to 50 megabytes.
For a 70B model, adapters could be a few hundred megabytes. Still small compared to the base model, but they add up.
Loading latency is proportional to adapter size divided by PCIe bandwidth. With NVLink or on-GPU cache, it's faster.
The scheduler's batching strategy can be tuned. Larger batches improve throughput but increase latency.
In practice, you want to set latency SLOs and let the scheduler maximize throughput within those bounds.
Every system has limitations. What are Punica's?
First, SGMV has some overhead compared to fused operations for single-LoRA serving. If you only ever use one adapter, don't use Punica.
Second, the current implementation focuses on LoRA specifically. Other adapter types like adapters from AdapterHub or prefix tuning would need different kernels.
Third, very large batches with many distinct adapters can reduce arithmetic intensity. The segments become too small.
In practice, they found this wasn't a problem for realistic workloads. But it's a theoretical limitation.
Finally, Punica assumes adapters are available when requests arrive. If you need to train new adapters on demand, that's a different problem.
Let's summarize what we've learned about Punica.
The core insight is that multi-tenant LoRA serving can be efficient if you batch across adapters intelligently.
The SGMV kernel enables this by segmenting batches and processing each segment with the appropriate adapter weights.
The kernel uses GPU tensor cores, split-K parallelization, and careful memory access patterns to maintain high throughput.
The full Punica system adds scheduling, memory management, and on-demand adapter loading.
The result is 12x higher throughput than naive approaches, with only 2 milliseconds additional latency.
This makes personalized LLMs economically viable. One GPU cluster can serve hundreds of specialized adapters.
The code is open source at punica-ai/punica on GitHub. Similar techniques have been adopted by vLLM and other serving systems.
If you're building a platform with many fine-tuned models, multi-tenant serving is something to think about.
The paper is on arXiv at 2310.18547, and was published at MLSys 2024.
Time to test your understanding with a couple of quizzes.
Quiz: What is the main challenge that prevents naive batching when serving multiple different LoRA adapters, and how does SGMV solve it?
Take a moment to think about it.
Answer: The main challenge is that different requests in a batch need different adapter weights. You can't do one big matrix multiplication because each request's LoRA computation requires its own A and B matrices. SGMV solves this by segmenting the batch, grouping requests by their adapter, and processing all segments in a single kernel launch. It gathers the appropriate weights for each segment, performs parallel matrix-vector multiplications, and scatters results back.
Here's quiz number two.
Quiz: Why does Punica use a split-K strategy for the shrink kernel but not for the expand kernel?
Think back to what we covered about the kernel implementation.
Answer: The shrink kernel reduces from the hidden dimension to the low-rank dimension, which is typically small, like 8 or 16. There's not enough parallelism in such a small output dimension to keep the GPU busy. Split-K divides the work along the input dimension instead, giving each block a portion to process, then combines results with a reduction. The expand kernel doesn't need this because it outputs to the full hidden dimension, which provides plenty of parallelism naturally.
That's all for today's episode on Punica.
Thanks for joining us on this exploration of efficient multi-LoRA serving.
Until next time, keep strolling.
And may your gradients never explode.